---
layout: detailed-guidance
title: Key performance indicators
subtitle: Other metrics your service might measure or track
status: draft
category: measurement
type: guide
audience:
  primary: service-managers, performance-analysts
  secondary: designers, developers, qa, content-designers
phases:
  - beta
  - live
breadcrumbs:
  -
    title: Home
    url: /service-manual
  -
    title: Measurement
    url: /service-manual/measurement
---

Think about other useful KPIs, specific to your service, that will help you measure and improve its performance. Measure these in addition to the four core KPIs:

* [cost per transaction](/service-manual/measurement/cost-per-transaction.html)
* [user satisfaction](/service-manual/measurement/user-satisfaction.html)
* [completion rate](/service-manual/measurement/completion-rate.html)
* [digital take-up](/service-manual/measurement/digital-takeup.html)

##Understand user and stakeholder needs

Different sets of users within each department will typically have their own requirements for each service. On a daily basis, a [Service Manager](/service-manual/the-team/service-manager.html) will need to see a range of metrics that help them make decisions about the service.


Identify the various stakeholders within your organisation and prioritise their requirements. These could be:

* technical requirements, like improving response time or server resilience
* financial requirements, like reducing costs or increasing revenue
* customer service requirements to improve customer satisfaction
* wider strategic aims to reduce fraud and error


These needs will typically be reflected in the organisation’s business objectives or in the business case for transforming a service.

An approach that worked well for GOV.UK was to run a brainstorming session to generate a long list of metrics. This list was then narrowed down by asking senior managers, 'if you had to choose one KPI, what would it be?'

###Check your progress

1. Have you identified who your users and/or stakeholders are?
2. Have you clearly expressed your users and stakeholders' needs?
3. Have you prioritised services?

##Decide what to measure

Develop simple, actionable and collectable metrics based on your understanding of user and stakeholder needs. Identify where that information will come from and how frequently it will be needed. Think especially about the functions your service is relying on and try to identify some KPIs to ensure you are constantly monitoring and improving these functions.

Measure things like:

* the number of downloads
* a transaction's drop off rate
* the payment success rate

Record every event generated by the system even if it’s not currently of interest. Measure everything (where it’s cost-effective and practical to do so). This will make it much easier to revise your chosen metrics later on, and customise data visualisations to different audiences.

###Check your progress

1. Are your metrics simple, actionable and collectable?
2. Have you mapped your metrics to the relevant audience?
3. Have you identified where your metrics will come from?
4. Do you know how frequently your users need performance information?

##Further information

Whilst identifying possible KPIs your service might measure, you might want to read:

* the NAO report [Digital Britain One: Shared infrastructure and services for government online](http://www.nao.org.uk/publications/1012/digital_britain_one.aspx), which identified that there was a lack of information on the costs and associated benefits of digital services
* [Occam’s Razor](http://www.kaushik.net/avinash/), a blog by Avinash Kaushik with useful advice about metrics, KPIs and analytics (for example [this article on how to set good performance indicators](http://www.kaushik.net/avinash/rules-choosing-web-analytics-key-performance-indicators/)
* the [Performance Platform](https://www.gov.uk/performance) by GDS, which will allow aggregation of data from a range of sources including web analytics, survey and finance data
