#Digital analytics team skills
A good digital service needs a skilled team of digital analysts to continually monitor performance, identify where potential improvements could be made and test the impact of new designs. This guidance describes some of the skills required to do the job and provides template job descriptions to help you start building a strong team.

##Guidance¶
The key skills required by a digital analyst are:
* Strong numerical skills
* Experience with digital analytics software
* Understands how digital analytics works
* Can present data effectively
* Can distill large amounts of complex data into clear, actionable insights
* Comfortable working with service managers and senior managers

A digital analytics manager will also need the following skills:
* Strong presentational skills
* Collaborative approach to work
* Good at prioritising time-critical work
* An understanding of the wider digital landscape
* An understanding of how digital analytics fits with other data sources and customer insight

##Templates¶
Job description - [Product Analytics Lead](https://docs.google.com/a/digital.cabinet-office.gov.uk/document/d/18Px4dlhSxzTuLTLzKe3_1n-1HCwV3hi9UUc1yVNuIXo/edit)

Job description - [Product analyst](https://docs.google.com/a/digital.cabinet-office.gov.uk/document/d/1NqcKTxqYit9BXPxj_paI4qsV_8TzMyK4bIIYrg4OJGg/edit)

##Why we do this¶
The reason we hire skilled analysts is that high quality digital services continually develop and improve over time. Development doesn’t stop once the product is operational. Once a service is live, analytics provide a key tool in understanding what behaviours users are exhibiting. Working with customer insight colleagues who focus on the why of behaviour; they provide the business with vital data to help product managers make decisions about new releases and features. It continues apace with new releases happening daily or even hourly. Analysts provide the conduit between the huge amounts of data generated by high volume services and the insight required by service managers to make product improvements. It is this key skill of distilling data into actionable insight that makes a good analyst.

##Further reading¶
Avinash Kaushik provides his take on the subject in his blog article entitled [Seven Skills to Look for in a Web Analytics Manager](http://www.kaushik.net/avinash/seven-skills-to-look-for-in-a-web-analytics-manager/).

[Free Content from Web Analytics Demystified](http://www.webanalyticsdemystified.com/content/index.asp)