---
layout: detailed-guidance
title: Analytics skills
subtitle: Understanding user data
category: the-team
type: guide
audience:
  primary: analyst
status: draft
phases:
  - discovery
---

Good digital services will make use digital analysts to continually monitor performance data, identify where potential improvements could be made and test the impact of new designs.

## The importance of analysts

The reason we hire skilled analysts is that high quality digital services continually develop and improve over time. Development doesn’t stop once the service is operational. 

Once a service is live, analytics provide a key tool in understanding what behaviours users are exhibiting. Working with user insight colleagues who focus on the why of behaviour, they provide the business with vital data to help product managers make decisions about new releases and features. 

Their work will continue with each new release or feature prototype, and they form the conduit between the data generated by high volume services and the insight required to make product improvements.

## Skills
Analysts need to have:
* strong numerical skills
* experience with digital analytics software
* understand how digital analytics works
* the ability to present data effectively
* the ability to distill large amounts of complex data into clear, actionable insights

A digital analytics manager will also need the following skills:
* strong presentational skills
* collaborative approach to work
* good at prioritising time-critical work
* an understanding of the wider digital landscape
* an understanding of how digital analytics fits with other data sources and user insight

## Job description templates
[Product Analytics Lead](https://docs.google.com/a/digital.cabinet-office.gov.uk/document/d/18Px4dlhSxzTuLTLzKe3_1n-1HCwV3hi9UUc1yVNuIXo/edit) (Google drive link. You will need permission to view.)

[Product analyst](https://docs.google.com/a/digital.cabinet-office.gov.uk/document/d/1NqcKTxqYit9BXPxj_paI4qsV_8TzMyK4bIIYrg4OJGg/edit) (Google drive link. You will need permission to view.)


##Further reading
Avinash Kaushik provides his take on the subject in his blog article entitled [Seven Skills to Look for in a Web Analytics Manager](http://www.kaushik.net/avinash/seven-skills-to-look-for-in-a-web-analytics-manager/).

[Free Content from Web Analytics Demystified](http://www.webanalyticsdemystified.com/content/index.asp)
